This video we'll apply some of the concepts that we've learned in this section to solve a problem but
will do for us is will solve the problem using literal constants.
And then what we'll do as well refactored to use declared constants and along the way you'll see how
much better it is used declared constants.
OK so here's the problem we're going to solve.
Frank has a carpet cleaning service that charges $30 per room and there's a sales tax rate of 6 percent.
All the estimates are valid for 30 days.
So our program is really we're going to prompt the user for the number of rooms that would like cleaned
and we're going to provide an estimate.
Decimal looks something like this.
You can see here starting at line 13 estimate for carpet cleaning service number of rooms too.
That's the number that the user entered price per room $30 cost $60.
Obviously that would be $30 per room times two rooms.
The tax which would be 6 percent based on the $60 which would be $3 is 60 cents then the total estimate
would be sixty three dollars and sixty cents and then you print out this estimate is valid for 30 days.
Now I'm using dollars you could use euros you could use any currency you like.
Also I know that the formatting is that right.
Obviously three dollars and sixty cents would be three point six zero.
Don't worry about that right now let's worry about solving this problem and using literal constants
and using declared constants.
Worry about output formatting in a different section and we'll go over a bunch different ways to do
formatting including currency formatting based on your locale.
All right.
So let's think about how we're going to solve this problem.
Programmers often use something called pseudo code pseudo code is like in English like or your own natural
spoken language like representation of the algorithm or the steps necessary to solve the problem.
In this example I wrote down some pseudo code and pseudo code that don't let anybody tell you that is
a right way and a wrong way to do pseudo code that really isn't.
It's not a programming language.
This is something that organizes your thoughts and allows you to solve the problem.
Remember if you can't solve the problem in pseudocode there's no way you're going to solve it in C or
in Java or in any other programming language.
So in this case this is my.
These are the steps that I want to take to solve this problem.
The first thing I want to do and you can see here on 9:23 is prompt the user to enter the number of
rooms.
Great.
I want to display the number of rooms to the user display the price per room.
Didn't want to display the cost which is the number of firms times the price per room.
I want to display the tax which is the number of rooms times the price per room times the tax rate.
They don't want to display the total estimate the total estimate of course is the cost plus the tax.
They I want to display at the end.
This estimate is valid for 30 days.
So what we want to do is we want to mimic this sample output right here.
OK so let's get started.
What we'll do first is we'll do this using literal constants and then we'll refactor it using declared
constants.
So the first thing I'm saying is hello.
Welcome to Frank's carpet cleaning service.
That's my little introduction.
Now I need to ask the user again look at the pseudo code.
Ask the user how many rooms they buy to be clean.
OK so that's you that will say seek out and we'll say how many rooms would you like clean
and I'm going to type this along and if I make typos and errors that's fine I'll fix them along the
way.
And you probably make the same kinds of errors so you'll see how to fix them.
Semi-colon at the end.
And there's a typo right here.
So how many rooms would you like cleaned.
Now let's run this.
And what I'm doing is in pressing control F5 which is build and run and you can see here.
Hello.
Welcome to Frank's carpet cleaning service.
How many rooms would you like cleaned.
Perfect.
Now I'd like to put a space between the first line and the second line of output.
Now there's a couple of ways I can do that I can come down here and I could just add another line and
that will print two new lines at the end which would be fine.
I could also just say see out and line here which prints out a line.
Let's run that machine with that looks like.
Now you can see that there's a line between the first line and the second line.
And I can also use a character literal constant right here at the front of the house if you put a slash
and a backslash in that's a new line.
And I can get rid of this and it has the same effect.
So it's going to happen here is it's going to print a new line before it prints the how.
So if I run this now you can see I get the same effect.
So this is an example of embedding those escape codes as I mentioned in the PowerPoint slides into String
literals.
So now we're here.
Next step is to read in the number of rooms from the user so obviously we need to use the extraction
operator with the C in object but we need to store that somewhere.
So let's create an integer will create a variable here and we'll call it number of rooms.
Best practice is to initialize it so I'm going to initialize it to 0 and see in and get the number of
rooms from CNN.
OK so again let's see where we're at.
We've outputted our prompt and the user has entered the number of rooms.
Now we've got all the information that we need to do our calculations.
We know that it's $30 per room and we know that it's a 6 percent tax rate.
That's all I need.
So let's create some output statements and I'm going to close this down here just to create a little
bit more room.
All right.
So let's go here and we're going to say see out and that's put a slash and here too.
I'd like a space right here.
So I'm going to say estimate for carpet cleaning service
will create a new line here.
Now we want to display the number of rooms to the user.
Say number of rooms and I'll put a dollar sign in here I'm not too worried about the formatting I'm
just using dollars so might as well put the dollar sign here.
And I want to display the number of firms where do I get that like that right from here.
That variable right there the user just entered a number and I stored it in there so that can it contain
whatever they entered.
So there's a number of rooms and then and line.
All right.
Let's run this trial at.
And I've got an error that says I forgot to put an L at the end of the line.
There we go.
So let's run this again.
How many rooms would you like clean that say two rooms clean and estimate for carpet cleaning services
number of rooms.
I don't want a dollar there.
I want dollar for prices so that I'll fix that error.
Two rooms.
Perfect.
OK so now let's start doing some of the calculations but first we need to print out the price per room
and that's a given that was given to us as $30.
So we'll say price per room here we'll put a dollar sign and we'll say 30 we'll use a literal right
in there and we'll say in line.
All right so that's it.
Then we'll say what's the cost.
We'll have to do a calculation.
We'll see see out would be cost.
And again I'll put a dollar sign in here.
And what's the costs going to be while the cost is going to be 30 times the number of rooms.
Right.
$30 per room times the number of rooms and we'll put in new line of DNA.
Let's test this out as we go.
So let's run it.
I went to rooms clean so I expect the costs at this point to be $60.
So two rooms $30 per room cost $60 so we're good.
All right so let's continue and we'll say seek out what's my tax or my sales tax is again I'll use dollar
and my sales tax is going to be the same calculation right thirty times the number of rooms.
And again next you'll cook character right here to get rid of it.
Thirty times the number of rooms times 0.06 which is the tax rate and bine.
I'll save this.
Let's run one more time.
Two rooms cleaned $30 it's $60 six per cent of 60 is $3 to 60 cents.
OK so we're good.
Now we're going to calculate the total estimate which is going to be the costs plus the tax.
But first I just want to print out a nice little line that separates everything together.
That's long enough and up and line at the end.
All right so now let's say what the total estimate is and then we just need to say the estimate is valid
for 30 days and we're done so see out we'll say total estimate and again in dollars is going to be OK
with it to do the calculation again.
So we're going to say 30 times the number of rooms which gives us the cost.
Right.
And I'm going to put some parens around that because I need to add to that.
Plus 30 times the number of rooms times 0.06 which is my sales tax.
So that's my cost plus my sales tax and a newline at the end.
Last thing is that say seek out this estimate is valid for however many days and we said 30
and I put a space in front of the Deja's we have a little room on the line here and I think we're good.
Let me clean this up a little bit down here.
So it all fits a little better.
All right so let's run it and then we'll go over it real quick.
I'm going to save it and run it with control of 5.
How many rooms would you like clean two rooms number of rooms is to the price per room is 30.
The cost is 60.
The taxes 360.
So you would expect the total estimate to be 60 360 which it is this estimate is valid for 30 days.
Let's try it again.
Let's run it again with one room this time.
One room is $30.
The cost is $30 the taxes adulterating total estimate 30 180.
So it looks good.
Don't forget to test with zero so zero rooms cleaned zero cost the Rotax zero estimate.
Great.
Don't worry about testing with illegal values we'll learn how to deal with illegal values later.
So for example expected to use this in a type zero or something positive in the number of rooms that
are going to type in negative 1 or Joe or Frank or anything like that.
As I said we'll deal with exceptions as the course progresses.
So that's it.
That's the program.
It's it works.
It's pretty easy to understand it follows our pseudocode.
But there's a couple of issues here.
First suppose that I want to increase my cost per room or my price per room to $32 and 50 cents.
What do I do.
Well I could do a search and replace.
Right.
Let's do that.
I'll do a search find and replace
and I want to look for 30 and I want to replace it with 30 to 50.
And I want to do it everywhere replace all done close up and run it
so I want to do two rooms two times 30 to 50 is 65.
That's correct.
The tax is thirty three dollars and ninety cents.
The total estimate is correct.
Looks good right.
Except for one little thing this estimate is valid for 32 and a half days.
You can see that the 30 was replaced with 32 and a half.
I didn't want to do that.
So I need to go back to my code and it's changed that to 30 and now we're OK.
This is easy to fix in this example because it's really small but if you've got thousands of lines of
code and you're doing search and replaces like this it's real possible that that 30 is going to be in
different places and it doesn't represent price per room it represents something else and you just really
messed up your program.
You made a lot of changes you did intend to change.
So hopefully you'll see what I mean.
I'm going to undo this 30 and I hope I'm back to where I was.
Yep I'm back to where I was with 30.
What I want to do here is I want to use declared constants rather than these literal constants.
So let's do that first let's just create the variable name will make it a constant so we need something
for the price per room.
So let's create that let's say int price per room and we condition initialize it to 30.
And the idea being instead of using 30 here we'll use that name price per room.
OK.
That's OK.
But why an integer that's really doesn't make too much sense.
It makes sense with 30.
But if I change the price per room 30 to 50 or some real number like that a floating point number.
This worked very well.
So this really should be a double and I'm going to change that right there.
That gives us a floating point number and the last thing I want to do is I want to make it Konst.
I don't want that to change in my program.
Always want it to be 30.
While this program is running OK now if I try to change that right here I'll just show you a quick price
per room.
Let's say I want to change that to 100 and I'll just compile over here I'll get a compiler error that
says error assignment of read only variable price per room.
You just told the compiler that price per room is constant.
And here you tried to change the computer saying no way.
You just told me that this should not be allowed.
So that's one of the benefits of constants as I mentioned in the lecture.
So let me get rid of that.
And so that's one of the constants we need.
We also need another constant up at a 30 point zero in here to be more accurate because it is a real
number.
I need another one for the sales tax so I could say Konst again double and I could say sales tax or
sales rate or whatever you want to call it.
In this case is 0.06.
And then finally let's create another one for the estimate expiry which is the 30 days conc this case
could be an integer and we'll just say estimate expertly and we'll initialize that to 30.
And this will be a good place for comment days.
Okay so now we've got those three conc.
So what we can do now is let's go through our code and will replace that 30 for example with price per
room that 0 0 6 with sales tax and so forth.
This is called refactoring your code refactoring means changing your code to make it better without
changing behavior.
That's real important.
Refractories does not change the behavior of the code it just makes your code better more modifiable
easier to read and so forth.
So let's do that.
I'm going to use price per room here.
Just going to copy and paste it in here pasted in here.
I'll paste it in here and here in here and not in here because that's my expertise.
I'll take sales tax copy that and I'll paste it here as well as over here.
And then finally we'll do the estimate expiry right here.
Alright so now let's run this again.
And the behavior should not change.
I want two rooms and two rooms at $30 is $60 360 sales tax sixty 360's total estimate and it's valid
for 30 days.
Perfect as you can see this code is much more readable now you can actually see what's going on and
more importantly if I want to change the price per room to 30 to 50 I only have to do it in one place
right up here.
Second make this 32 50.
Save it build and run again.
Two rooms 30 to 50 which is $65 as the cost 390 tax 68 90 and it's still valid for 30 days.
So could see the benefits of using declared constants.
You could just make changes in one place you're guaranteed that they're not going to change even if
you made a mistake and it was an accident and it makes your code so much more readable and modifiable.
Now although this code is much better now after refactoring it still has a few problems and those problems
are going to address as the course progresses.
You hopefully have seen that right about here we're doing a calculation and then right here we're doing
the same calculation again and here we're doing the same calculation again.
And here we're doing it again.
OK so that's four places that were doing the same calculation.
That's four places we could mess up.
We really don't want to do that we want to do that calculation exactly in one place and what we'll do
is when we learn about assignment statements a little bit more about mathematical expressions will do
that there and then a little bit later in the course will use functions to do that in exactly one place.
So if you notice that this isn't quite right you see a lot of duplications of code.
You're absolutely right and we're going to handle that as we go.